# Capter 2

ANSI changed some variables types in C to `signed` and `unsigned` for each (int & char) type of variable.
Some objects mabe be declared `const`, which prevents them from being changed.

## Variable Names
C recomand to:
- don't start varialbe name with `_` althogh some library may used it.
- don't use camel case names (must be lower case)
- use lower case names with _ as space
- use all upper case for symbolic constants.
- at least the first 31 characters of an internal name are significant.
- for external names standartd gurantess uniqueness only for 6 char and a single case.
- you can't use reseved key words as name like: `if`, `else`, `int`, `float` etc...
- short names for loop indices.
- chose longer name for external variables (out of loop)

> [!NOTE]
> for function names and external variables, the number may be less than 31.
> because external names may be used by assembler and loader over which the langauge has no control.


## Data types and Sizes
- char: single byte: holding 1
- int: nature size of integer in host machine
- float: single precision floating point
- double: double precision floaint point.
- short and long can be applied to int.

> [!NOTE]
> in long, short ints the word int can be ommited.

- short: 16 bit
- long: 32 bit
(int is the nature size of particular matchine. is eather 16 or 32 bits)

NOTE 1: compiler chose to use which size for its own hardware.
NOTE 2: short is no longer than int

NOTE 3: The qualifier signed or unsigned may be applied to cahr or any int.
NOTE 4: unsigned numbers are always postive or zero. (obey the laws of arithmetic modulo 2^n; n: is number of bits in the type)

for example: if chars are 8 bits, unsigned char variables have value between 0 and 155. while singed chars have value between -128 and 127.
all are matchine-dependent and printables are positive.

NOTE 5: the long double specifies extended-precision floating point.

the size of `float`, `double`, `long double` can be different

## Detect max value of type
```text
Mimimum: -(<R>)((<T>)~0 >> 1) - 1
Maximum: (<R>)((<T>)~0 >> 1)
```
- `<R>`: return type that usualy is `int`
- `<T>`: the type that need a maximum
- `~0`: give the first bit
- `>>`: right shift by 1 bit to remove the sign bit

**NEED TO ABOUT IT IN **[**HERE**](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2053843/min-and-max-value-of-data-type-in-c)



## Constants
long constant written with terminal **L**, like: `1234456789L`.
and unsinded constants are written with terminal **U** or **UL**.
and suffix **F** is for float

---

NOTE 1: leading `0 (zero)` in on an integer constant means octal.
NOTE 2: leading `0x or 0X` means hexadecimal

decimal 31:
`037`: octal
`0x1f or ox1F` in hex.

they can be followd by L or U for long or unsigned.
for exampe:

unsigned long hexadecimal of 15: `0XFUL`


### Escape sequences:
these sequences look like two charactars but represnt only one.
like: `\n` or `\t`; even `\000` as a byte-size bit pattern

the \000 all the 000 can be octal digits, or by: `\xhh` that `hh` is one or more hexadeciaml digits.


### Null char
the char const `\0` represong value of 0, but often written in `\0` to represent nature of some expression, but the numberic value of it is 0.



> [!NOTE]
> constant expression may be evaluted duration compilation rahter than run-time.
> 
> and may be used in any place that const can occur.


## String constnat
**A string constant is an array of characters.**

string has a `\0` at the end.

they are surrounded by `" STRING "` tehy can contain zero or more chars.


> [!NOTE]
> String constant can be concatenated at compile time

like:
```c
"ONE, " "TWO" -> "ONE, TWO"
```
(so it means you can split them!)

to determine the length of string (by scanning all the chars):
```c
int strlen(char s[]);
```


### Different between 'x' and "x"
first one is a numberic value of the charachter 'x'.
and the second one is a array of characters that contains: a letter x (numeric value) and '\0' at the end.



## Enum
they are list of constant integer values
like:

```c
enum boolean { NO, YES };
```
which the first one have a value of `0` and the value of second one is `1` and ...

values can be specified manually:

```c
enum white { SPACE='\s', ENDLINE='\n', TAB='\t' };
// or
enum white { JAN=1, FEB, MAR ... };
```

values don't need to be distinct from each other but names are.

NOTE: (compiler will not check the value)



## Declarations
variabled can be initialized when declared, like:
```c
char esc = '\\';
```
(initializer must be const expression)

automatic variables are initialized each time for functions;
(when enterd)

> External and static variabels are initialized to zero by default.

> Variables that have no initializer are garbage.

#### Const
const specify that its value will not be changed.
(even for arrays)

## Arithmetic Operators
`+`, `-`, `*`, `/` and
`%` wich: division any fractional part. the expression.
(it's not doubles or floats).

the direction of turncation for `\` and sign of the result for `%` are matchine dependent for negative operators (overflow, underflow)

> precedence: *, /, %, +, -


## Relational and Logical Operators
releatoin operators have lower precedance than arithmetic operators.
> precedence: (>, >=, <, <=), ==, !=

for the `&&` and `||` evaluated left to right, and valuation will stop as soon as result of one of them is known (false, true).

and then assignemnt, like:
```c
(c = getchar()) != '\n'
// Assignemt of the c variable and then check for endl.
```

unary negation operator: `!`


## Type Conversions
In general the only automatic conversation that convert a narrower operand into a wider one without losing information like int to float in: `F + i` exrepssion.

some conversation may have warning but they are not illegal, like: long int to short int, or float to int that may cuse lossing info.


- `lower` || `tolower` from ctypes.h: function: convert a single uppoercase char to it's lowercase if the input char is upper.
- `isdigit`: for checking that the char is digit or not.

corresponding upper case and lower case are fixed distance aprart.


some matchines are when converting char to int can return a negative value.
> On Some machines a char whose leftmost bit is 1 will be converted to a negative integer (sign extentions)
> 
> on other char is promoted to an int by adding zeros at the left end and the are always positive.

(C make sure that all the char be positive)

isdigit can return for any chars: (non-zero for true)

---

a binary operator like `+` or `*` has operands of different types
ther lower type is promoted to hte higher type before preation proceeds.

rules:
- if one of them is long double, both convert to the long double
- if one double make sure to convert both of them to double.
- same for float
- convert char and short char to int
- if one of them is long convert the scond one to long too.

> Floats in exrepssion are not automatically converted to double;

main reason to use `float` is to save storage in long arrays.
otherwise math.h uses `double`.

conversation rules are complicated and matchine dependedt.
for instanse:
if int is 16 bit and long is 32 bit
-1L < 1U   --> 1U which is a int is promoted to signed long.
-1L > 1UL  --> beacuse -1L is promoted to unsigned long and thus appreas to be a large psotive number.


---

char convert to int either by sign extention 
long int are converted to shorter ones or the chars by dropping the excess high-roder bits.

usualy type of right converts to type of left (could be double, float, int ...)

when there is no prototype for functions:
char & short -> int
float -> float


### Cast
```c
(type-name) expression

example:
sqrt((double) n)  // sqrt only accepts double and 'n' is int

```

> create a value not alterd.


when functions need a double and passed an int; converts int to double then execute the function.



## Increment and Decrement Operators
- `++n`: increments n before its value is used
- `n++`: increments n after its value is used


Note: `strcat()`: add two string together
