## Bitwise Operators
can appied to int float, short, char, long.
```text
& AND
| inclusive OR
^ exclusive OR
<< left shift
>> right shift
~ ones complement (unary)
```
more in [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGeOwlIGRGI)

- `&`: if both of them is one turn into 1
- `|`: if one of them is 1 turn into 1
- `^`: XOR => only one of them shoud be 1 otherwise is 0
- `<< val` double: sifht them by `val` to left and add them at the end
- `>> val` cut in half: sifht them by `val` to right and add them at the beggining

NOTE: right shifting an unsign quantity alwasy fill vacated bits with zeor

- `~` [complement operator](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzw9oVz1rjw): turn 1 into 0 and turn 0 to 1;

complement operator is independent of word length: (`x & ~077`)



- `getbits(x,p,n)`: returns the (right adjusted) n-bit filed of x that begins at position p.
exapme: `getbits(x, 4, 3)` returns the 3 bits in bit position 4, 3 and 2 right adjusted

```c
return (x >> (p+1-n)) & ~(~0 << n);
```

## Assignemnt Operator and Expressions

you can write `i = i + 2` to `i += 2`
and the `+=` called assignemtn operator.

most of the binary operator that have right and left part, also have assingment operators.



NOTE: unsigned variables enshures that when it is right-shiefted, vactaed bits will be filled with zeros regardless of the matchine


C suggest that use assignment variables;
for example `+=2` means that increment by 2 and not icrement by 2 and put it in i again.

> [!NOTE]
> Assignment statement have a value and can occur in expressions.



## Ternary Operator (short handed if)

```text
expr1 ? expr2 : expr3

(1 or 0) ? (if part) : (else part)
```

> [!NOTE]
> This is an expression and can be used wherever that expression can be used.

NOTE: if expr2 or expr3 have different type; they will convertd to a single one



## Precedence and Order of Evaluation
operator `->` and `.` used to access member of structure.

> [!NOTE]
> precedence of the bitwise operators &, ^, and | falls below == and != this implies that bit-testing expression must be fully parenthesized to give proper result


order of how to use functions is important 
functions (`()`) have the higher precedence, 
for example:
```c
// {{ 1 }}
printf("%d %d\n", ++n, power(2, n)); /* WRONG */

// {{ 2 }}
// Solution:
++n;
printf("%d %d\n", n, power(2, n)); /* WRONG */
```

if `{{ 1 }}` function called at the begging and then `++n` which makes it wrong result.


### Side Effect (Assingment to varialbes)
Function calls, nested assignemtn statments, increment, decrement operators cause side effect,

NOTE: most compiler make sure that increment / decrement are called before calling function but this is not work for `printf`.
