# Chapter 3

## statements and blocks
An expression becomes block when it is followed by semicolon.

NOTE: In C semicolon is statement terminator.
NOTE: Braces are used to group statement together so that they are syntactically equivalent to a single statement.

## If-Else

- Else part of an if-else is optional
- If checks for the numeric value of an expression

NOTE: in single line expresions (no braces) the `else` part goes with the inner if (indented):

```c
if (n > 0)
  if(a > b)
    z = a;
  else
    z = b;
```
if you want a proper result of an `else` you should use braces.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Use Braces for nested ifs.


## Else-If
usual `else` is for the **Default** part when, non of the if or else if's of above are not executed.
NOTE: when there is no possible action for default in that case `else` can be omitted.

## Switch
switch statement is a multi-way decision.

```c
switch(expression){
  case const-exprt: statements
  case const-exprt: statements
  default: statement
}
```

- `break`: the break statement causes an immediate exit from the switch.
NOTE: in `case` if one is exucuted check the next one and so on for this reason when all done we use `break` to escape.
NOTE: you can use `break` statments to exit the while loops too.

(`break` prevent to falling throught to the next)

#### Attach several caes to a single one
```c
switch(s){
  case '0': case '1': case '2':
    // is 0 or 1 or 2  
  ...
}
```

part of the book about `break` in the default case:
```part
As a matter of good form put a break after the last case
(the default here) even thought it's logically unnecessary.
Some day when another case gets added ath the end,
this bit of defencsive programming will save you.
```


## Loops--While and For
you can also turn a `for` loop to `while` loop by not giving any expretions to for:

```c
for (;;){
  ...
}
```
this loop is **INFINITE** and only can break with `break` or `return`.

(***Chosing Between WHILE and FOR is a personal choice; chose one that more readable and keep the expressions close together***)

---

> [!NOTE]
> it is bad style to force unreleated computations into the initialazation and increment of a for which are better reserved for loops control operations.


### Functions
- `isspace`: check for a white-space char and if there is returns `8` otherwise return `0`.
- `isdigit`: check for a char and if there is a digit (0 to 9) returns `1` otherwise return `0`.


## Shell Sort (1995)

```c
void shellsort(int v[], int n){
  int gap, i, j, temp;
  for(gap = n/2; gap > 0; gap /= 2)
    for(i = gap; i < n; i++)
      for(j=i-gap; j >= 0 && v[j]>v[j+gap]; j-=gap){
        temp = v[j];
        v[j] = v[j+gap];
        v[j+gap] = temp;
      }
}
```
there are 3 nested loops:
- **outermost**: controls the gap between compared elements shirink it from n/2 by a factor of two each pass until it becoms zero
- **middle**: loop steps along the elements
- **innermost**: loop compares each pair of elements that is separated by gap and reversed any taht are out of order


## Comma
A pair of expressions spearated by a comma is evaluted left to right.
and the type and the value of the result are the type and value of the right operands.

NOTE: In a for statement is is possible to place multiple expressions in the various parts.

---

The comma that separate function arguments, variables in delarations, etc..., are not comma operatos, and do not guarantee left to right evaluation.

> Comma operators should be used sparingly
> 
> The most sutable use are for constructs strongly releted to each other, as in the for loop is reverse and in macros where a multistep computation has to be a single expression.

- A comma expression might also be apporopriate for the exhange of elements in `reverse` wehre the exchange can be thought of as a single operation.

example:
```c
for (i = 0, j = strlen(s) - 1; i < j; i++, j--)
  c = s[i], s[i] = s[j], s[j] = c;
```

## Loops; Do-while
Do-while test at te bottom after making each pass through to loop body, **the body always executed at least once**.

```syntax
do
  statment
while(expr);
```

> The statement is executed, then expression is evaluted. and if it is <TRUE> statement evaluted again. and so on.

example:
```c
int main(void){
  int i = 0;
  do {
    printf("%i) Something\n", i);
    ++i;
  } while(i < 10);
}
/*
OUTPUT:
0) Something
1) Something
2) Something
3) Something
4) Something
5) Something
6) Something
7) Something
8) Something
9) Something
*/
```

## Break & Continue

- `break`: exit from loops like *while*, *for* and *do*, just as from switch.

NOTE: break cause the innermost enclosing loop or switch to be exited immediately.
NOTE: you can use `strlen` function to get lenght of string


- `continue`: it causes the next iteration of the enclosing *for*, *while* or *do loop* to begin. (skip this one)

in the do or while it means that the test part is executed immediately.
in the for control passes to the increment step.

NOTE: `continue` applies only to loops (unline break for switches)
(A `continue` inside a *switch* inside a loop causes the next loop iteration.)


## Goto and Labels
C provides the infinitely-abusable goto statement.
goto is never necessary.

there are a few situations where gotos may find a palce, the most common is to abandon proccessing in some deeply nested structure. such as breaking out of two or more loops at once. The *break* statement cannot be used directly since it only exists from the innermost loop

```syntax
for(...)
  for(...){
    ...
    if(disaster)
      goto errro;
  }

error:
  clean up the mess
```

A lable has the same from aas a varialbe name. and is followd by a colon.

It can be attached to any statment in the same function as the goto. The scoop of the lable is the entire function.


> [!NOTE]
> Code involving a goto can always be written without one.
> 
> though perhaps at the price of some repeted test or an extera varialbe.

***code that relies on goto statement is generally harder to understand***
goto statement should be used rarely, if at all.
