# Pointer and Arrays
A pointer is a variable that contains the address of a varialbe.

- They are the only way to express a computation.
- They usualy lead to more compact and efficent than can be obtained in other ways.
- Pointer and Arrays are closly realeated.
- Pointers have been lumped with the goto statment.
- Pointers can be used to achive clarity and simplicity.

NOTE:
- The type `void*` (pointer to void) replaces `char*` as the proper type for a generic pointer.

## Pointer and Addresses
A typical machine has an array of consecutively numbered or addressed meory cells that may be manipulated indiviually or in contigouus groups.

One common situation is that any byte can be a char.
a pair of one-byte cells can be treated as a short integer. and four adjacent bytes from a long.

**A Pointer is a group of ceslls (oftern two or four) that can hold an address.**

---

The unary operator (`&`) gives the address of an objex,t so the statement
```c
p = &c;
```
assigns the address of `c` to the variables `p`.
and `p` is said to "point to" c

- The `&` operator only applies to objects in memory, varialbes and array elements.(not even `register` variables)

The unary operator `*` is the indirection or dereferencing operator, when applied to a pointer, it accesses the object the opointer points to.

```c
int x = 1, y = 2, z[10];
int *ip;        /* ip is a pointer to int */
ip = &x;        /* ip now points to x */
y = *ip;        /* y is now 1 */
*ip = 0;        /* x is now 0 */
ip = &z[0];     /* ip now points to z[0] */
```

The declaration of the pointer ip

```c
int *ip;
```

is intended as a mnemonic; it says that the expression *ip is an int.
The reasoning applies to function declarations as well. for example
```c
double *dp, atof(char *);
```
syas that in an expression `*dp` and `atof(s)` ahve values of type double, and that the argument of `atof` is a pointer to char.

The implication that a pointer is constrained to point to a particular kind of object. every pointer points to specific data type.

NOTE: a "pointer to void" is used to hold any type of pointer but cannot be dereferenced itself.

If ip points to the integer x, then *ip can occur in any context where x could so
```c
*ip = *ip + 10;
```
incremtnts `*ip` by 10.

---


Assignemtn:
```c
y = *ip + 1
```
takes whater ip points at, adds 1, then assigns the result to y, while:
```c
*ip += 1
```
incremnts what ip points to, as do
```c
++*ip
```
and
```c
(*ip*)++
```
the parantheses are necessary in this  last example; without them the expression would incremnet `ip` instead of what it points to, because unary operators like `*` and `++` associates right to left.


## Pointers and Function Arguments
C passes argument to function by value, there is no way to  alter the varialbes inside the function. they can't affect the arguments.
but by passing pointers:
like:
```c
swap(&a, &b);
```
The operaotor `&` produces the address of a varialbe, `&a` is a pointer to a.

> Pointer  sargument enable a function to access and change object in the functino that called it.

NOTE: `getint` will read in one integer and discard any information typed after it.

## Pointers and Arrays
Any operation that can be achieved by array subscription can also be done with pointers.
The pointer version will in general be fater but is harder to understand

If `pa` is a pointer to an integer, declraed as:
```c
int *pa;
```
then assignemtn
```c
pa = &a[0];
```
sets `pa` to point to element zero of a; that is, pa contains the address of a[0].
now the assignemtn:
```c
x = *pa;
```
will copy the contents of a[0] into x.

NOTE: If `pa` points to a particular element of an array, then by definition `pa+1` points to the next element and so on...

NOTE: `*(pa+1)` refers to the content of `a[1]`...

in:
```c
pa = &a[0];
// and
pa = a;
```
both are the same, and `pa` and `a` have identical values.

C converts the `a[i]` to `*(a+i)` immediately.

---

There is one different between an array name and pointer that must be kept in mind:
- A pointer is a varialbe, so `pa=a` and `pa++` are legal, But an array name is not a varialbe, and those expressions are illegial.

When an array name is  passed to a function, waht is passed is the location of the initial element.
SO an array name paramter is a pointer, that is, a varialbe containing an addresss.

note:
```c
char s[];
// and
char *s;
```
are equivalent,

When an aray name is passed to a function, the function can at its convenience believe that it has been handed either an array  or a pointer, and manipulate it accordingly.

both:
```c
f(&a[2]);
// and
f(a+2);
```
pass to the function f the  address of the  subarrray that starts at `a[2]`.

Within f,  the parameter declaration can read
```c
f(int arr[]){...}
// and
f(int *arr){...}
```


## Address Arithmetic
If p is a pointer to some element of an array, then `p++` incremtnts p to point to the next element.

NOTE:
- In general a pointer can be initialized just as any other varialbe can.

if a initializing a pointer is like this:
```c
// At initializing
static char *allocp = &allocbuf;
```
can be written like:
```c
static char *allocp = &allocbuf[0];
```

NOTE: C gurantees that zero is never a valid address for data.

> [!NOTE]
> Pointers and ingeters are not interchangable.
> Zero is the sole exception: the constant zero may be assigned to a pointer and a pointer may be compared with the constant zero.
> The Symbolic constant NULL is often used in place of zero.
> s a menemonic to indicate more clearly that this is a special value for a pointer.

- `NULL` is defined in `<stdio.h>`.

NOTE 1:
- If  `p` and `q` point to members of the same array then relations like: `==`, `!=`, `>`, etc.. work properly.
- Any pointer can be meaningfully compared for equality or inequality with zero, but the behavor is undefined for arithmetic or comparisions with pointers that do not point to memebers of the same array.

Exception: The address of the first element past the end of an array can be used in pointer arithemetic.

NOTE 2 (**SAME ARRAY**):
You can use `+` and `-` in arrays, for memory address, like:
```c
p + n;
```

---


for eaxmple:

```c
/* strlen: return lenght of string s */
int strlen(char *s){
  char *p = s;
  while(*p != '\0')
    p++;
  return p - s;
}
```
In its declrations, `p` is initialied to `s`. that is to point to the first charachter of the string.
Each char is examined until the `'\0'` ath teh end is seen.
and `p-s` gives the number of characters advanced over, that is the string lenght.

NOTE:
the number of characters in the strinc could be too large to stroe in an int. The header `<stddef.h>` defines a type `ptrdiff_t` that is large enough to hold the signed diffrenet of two pointer values.

Hovever we would use `size_t` for the return type of `strlen` to match the standard library version. `size_t` is the unsigned integer type returned by the `sizeof` operaotr.


---


Pointer Arithmetic is constent.
`float` pointers occupy more storage than `chars`

if `p` where a pointer to *float*, `p++` would advance to the next float.

NOTE:
The valid pointer operations are assignemnt of pointers of the same type. Adding or subtracting a pointer and an interger, for pointers that are members of the same array, and assigning or comparing to zero. All other pointer arithemetic is illegal.

It is not legal to add two pointers, or multiply or divide or shift or mask them, or to add float or double to them, or even except for `void *` to assign a pointer of one type to a pointer of another type without a cast.
