## Character Pointers and Functions
Strings are written like:
```c
"I am a string"
```

This is an array of chars that ends with `'\0'`.
and `'\0'` called **NULL** char.

printf recives a pointer to the beggining of the character array.


> [!IMPORTANT]
> C does not provide any operatos for processing an entire string of characters as a unit.

---

```c
char amessage[] = "now is the time"; /* an array */
char *pmessage = "now is the time";  /* a pointer */
```

The `amessage` is an array, big enought to hold the sequence of characetrs, and `'\0'` that initializes it.
chars maybe change but `amessage` will always refer to the same storage.

The `pmessage` is a pointer, initialized to point to string constant.
The pointer may be subsequently be modified to point elsewhere, but the result is undefined if you try to modify the string contents.

STANDARD LIBRARY FUNCTINOS
- `strcpy(s, t)` copies the string `t` to string `s`. (`s=t`)
but this copies the pointer not the characters to the caracters.


You can increment the value of pointer like:
```c
void strcpy(char *s, char *t){
  while((*s++ = *t++) != '\0')
    ;
}
```
the postfix `++` doesn't change t until after this character has been fetch.
In the same way, the character is sorted into the old s positio before s is incremented.

characters are copied from t to s up to and including the terminatin `'\0'`.


- `strcmp(s, t)`: compares the character strings `s` and `t`.

some of the unique standard idioms got pudhinh snf popping a stack:
```c
*p++ = val;   /* push val onto stack */
val = *--p;   /* pop top of stack into val */
```

NOTE: The header `<string.h>` contains declaratios for the functions (`strcpy`, `strcmp`).


## Pointer Arrays; Pointers to Pointers
because pointers are varialbes they can be stored in array just like any other varialbe.

the line:
```c
char *lineprt[MAXLINES];
```

syas that lineprt is an array of MAXLINES elements, each lement of which is a pointer to a char, this is ,`lineprt[i]` is a character pointer, and `*lineprt[i]` is the character it points to.

Since the `lineprt` is itself the name of an array, it can be treated as a pointer in the same manner.

Initially `*lineprt` points to the first line; each increment advances it to the next line pointer.

## Multi-dimensional Arrays
they are much less used than arrays of pointers.
two-dimensional array is really a one-dimensional array, each of whose emenets is an array, hecse subscripts are writtne as:
```c
daytab[i][j]   /* [row][col] */
// WRONG:
daytab[i, j]   /* WRONG */
```
(elements are stored by rows).

an array is initialized by list of initializers in braces;
each row of a two-deimensional array is initialized by a corresponding sub-list.

> IF a two-dimensional array is to be passed to a funciton, the parameter declaration in the function must include the number of columns; the number of rows is irrelevant, since what is passed is, as before.
A pointer to an array of rows, where each row is an array of 13 *ints*, In this particular case, it is a pointer to objects that are arrays of 13 *ints*.

for example:
```c
f(int daytab[2][13]){...}
// it could also be
f(int daytab[][13]){...}
//  since the number of rows is  irrelevant, or it could be
f(int (*daytab)[13]){...}
```

which says that the parameter is a pointer to an array of 13 integers, The parentheses are neccessary since brackets `[]` have higher precedence that `*`.
without parentheses, the declaration
```c
int *daytab[13]
```
is an array of 13 pointers to ingeters.

> Only the first dimension (subscript) of an  array is free; all others have to be specified.


## Initialization of Pointer Arrays
for example:
```c
static char *name[] = {
  "Illegal Month",  // 1-12 instead of 0-11
  "January", "February", "March",
  "April", "May", "June",
  "July", "August", "September",
  "October", "November", "Decempber"
}
```
- `name`: an array of character pointers.
NOTE: Since the size of the array `name` is not specified, the compiler counts, the initializers and fills in the correct number.


## Pointers vs. Multi-dimensional Arrays
(The difference between an array of pointers and two-dimensional array)

```c
int a[10][20];
int *b[10];
```
both have `a[3] [4]` and `b[3] [4]`.
A is `a` true two-dimensional array: 200 int-sized locations have been set aside, calc: `20xrow+col`
hovewer `b` the definition only allocates 10 pointers and does not initialize them; initialization must be done explicitly, either statically or with code.

Assuming that each  element of `b` does point to a twnty-element array, then there will be 200 ints set aside, plus then  cells for the pointers.

The Important advantage of the pointer array is that the rows of the array may be of different lenghts. That is, each element of   b need  not  point to a twenty-element element vector; some may point to two elements,  some  to fifty, and some to none at all.

> By far most frequent use of array of pointers is to store character strings of diverse lenghts,
```c
char *name[] = { "Illegal month", "Jan", "Feb", "Mar", ... };
```
is like:
```structure
name:
---------
|       |       |---------|
|       ------->| illegal |
|       |       |---------|
|       |
|       |       |---------|
|       ------->|  jan\0  |
|       |       |---------|
|       |
|       |       |---------|
|       ------->|  feb\0  |
|       |       |---------|
---------
```

and for two-dimensional
```c
char aname[][15] = { "Illegal month", "Jan", "Feb", "Mar", ... };
```
is like:
```structure
name
--------------------------------------------------------
| illegal\0      Jan\0         Feb\0        Mar\0  ... |
--------------------------------------------------------
0                15            30           45          ...
```
.
