## Command-line Arguments
When `main` is called, is called with two arguments.
The first (conventionally called `argc` for argument count) is the number of command-line arguments that program was invoked with.
The second (`argv` for argument vector) is a pointer to an array of character strings that contain the arguments, one per string.

By convention, `argv[0]` is the name by which the program was invoked. so `argc` is at least 1.

each command seporated by space char.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
/* echo command-line argument; 1st version */
int main(int argc, char *argv[]){
  int i;
  for(i = 1; i < argc; i++)
    printf("%s%s", argv[i], (i < argc - 1) ? " ": "");
  printf("\n");
  return 0;
}
```

Since the `argv` is a pointer to an array of pointers, we can manipulate the pointer rahter than index the array.



The sntandard library function `strstr(s, t)` returns a pointer to the first occurrence of the string `t` in the string `s`, or NULL if there is none. it is declared in `<string.h>`

NOTE: command-line falgs(optional arguments) strts with `-` for example if there is flag for except, is like: `-x` or something like that...

Optional arguments should be permitted in any order. and the rest of the program should be independent of the number of arguments that were present.

REMINEDER: `*++argv` is a pointer to an argument string, and so `(*++argv)[0]` is its first character.
An alternative valid from would be `**++argv` because `[]` binds tighter than `*` and `++`, the parentheses are necessary without them the expression would be taken as: `*++(argv[0])`.

The expression `*++array[0]` increments the pointer `argv[0]`


## Pointers to Functions
In C, a function itself is not a variable. but is possible to define pointers to functions, which can be assigned, placed in arrays, passed to functions, returned by functions and so on...

the operator `&` is not necessary before an array name.

we can pass functions, like this prototype:
```c
void qsort(void *lineprt[], int left, int right,
  int (*comp)(void *, void *));
```
NOTE: `qsort` expects an array of pointers, two integers, and a function with two pointer arguments.

The generic pointer type `void *` is used for the pointer arguments. any pointer can be cast to `void *` and back again without loss of informations, so we can call `qsort` by casting arguments to `void *`.

The fourth paramter of `qsort` is:
```c
int (*comp)(void *, void *)
```

which says that `comp` is a pointer to a function that has two `void *` arguments and returns an int.
and the example usage:
```c
if((*comp)(v[i], v[left]) < 0)
```
is constent with the declaration: `comp` is a pointer to a function, `*comp` is the function and
```c
(*comp)(v[i], v[left])
```
is the call to it, the parentheses are needed to the components are correctly associated, without them,
```c
int *comp(void *, void *)   /* Wrong */
```
says that `comp` is a function returning a pointer to an `int`, which is very different.


## Complicated Declarations
The difference between:
```c
int *f();  /* f: functino returning pointer to int */

// and
int (*pf)();  /* pf: pointer to function returning int */
```

`*` is a prefix operator and it has lower precedence than `()`, so parentheses are necessary to force the proper association
