# Structures
A structure is a collection of one or more varialbes, possibly of different types, grouped together under a single name for convenient handling.

They help to orgenize complicated data, particularly in large programs.

## Basics of Structures
for example a graphic point that has an `x` and `y`, can be defined in structures like:
```c
struct point{
  int x;
  int y;
};
```
The keyword `struct` intrododuces a structrue declaration.

NOTES:
- the varialbes names in a structure are called `members`.
- A `struct` declaration defines a type.

you can define variables like:
```c
struct {...} x, y, z;

// just like:
int x, y, z;
```

- A structure declaration that is not followed by a list of varialbes reserves no storage;

you can use `point` like this:
```c
struct point pt;
...
```

defines a varialbe `pt` which is a structure of type `struct point`.

A structure can be initialized by following its definition with a list of initializers, each a constant expression, for the members:
```c
struct point maxpt = {320, 200};
```

you can access a structure memebers, like:

```c
structure-name.memeber
```
- `.` is a structure memeber operator.

Structure can be nested. One representation of a rectangle is a pair of points that denote the diagonally opposite corners.
example:
```c
struct rect {
  struct point pt1;
  struct point pt2;
};
```

The rect structrue contains two point structure. and can be declared as:
```c
struct rect screen;
// then:
screen.pt1.x;
```

> [!NOTE]
> I tested it an structure without initialazation for int type the first int type has a value of 24. (IDK WHY)


## Structures and Functions
The only legal operators on a structure are copying it or assigning to it as a unit. taking its address with `&`, and accessing its memebers.
Copy ans assignment include passing arguments to functions and returning values from functions as well.

An automatic structure may also be initialized by an assingment.

for functions and structures the are at least 3 possible apporoaches: pass components separetely, pass an entire structrue, or pass a pointer to it, each has its good points and bad points.


If a large structure is to be passed to a function, it is generally more efficient to pass apointer than to copy the whole structure, Structure pointers are just like pointers to ordinary variables, The declaration
```c
struct point *pp;
```

says that `pp` is apointer to a structure of type `struct point`, and the members are like:
```c
(*pp).x
(*pp).y
```

To use `pp` we might write, for example:
```c
struct point origin, *pp;

pp = &origin;
printf("origin is (%d, %d)\n", (*pp).x, (*pp).y);
```

The parentheses are necessary in `(*pp).x` because the precedence of the structure memeber operator `.` is higher that `*`. The expression `*pp.x` means `*(pp.x)`, which is illegal here becuase x is not a pointer.

If `p` is a pointer to a structure, then:
```c
p->member-of-structure
```
refers to the particular memeber. (The operator `->` is a minus sign immediately followed by `>`), So we could write instead:
```c
printf("origin is (%d, %d)\n", pp->x, pp->y);
```
Both `.` and `->` associated from left to right.

NOTE: The structure operators `.` and `->`, together with `()` for function calls and `[]` for subscripts, are at the top of the precedence hierarchy and thus bind very tightly, for example, given the declaration:
```c
struct {
  int len;
  char *str;
} *p;
```
then:
```c
++p -> len
```
increments len, not p, becuase the implied parenthesization is ++(p->len).

Parentheses can be used to alter the binding: `(++p)->len` increments p before accessing `len`, and `(p++)->len` increments `p` afterward. (This last set of parentheses is unnecessary).

In the same way, `*p->str` fetches whatever str points to; `*p->str++` increments `str` after accessing whatever it points to (just like `*s++`);
`(*p->str)++` increments whatever `str` points to; and `*p++->str` increments `p` after accessing whatever `str` points to.


## Arrays of Structures
The structure declaration
```c
struct key {
  char *word;
  int count;
} keytab[NKEYS];
```
declares a structure type `key` defines an array `keytab` of structes of this type, and sets aside storage for them. Each element of the array is a structure. This could also be writtne:
```c
char key{
  char *word;
  int count;
};
strcut key keytab[NKEYS];
```

Since the structure `keytab` contains a constant set of names, it is easiest to make it an external varialbe and initialize it once and for all when it is defined.

The definition is followed by a list of initializers enclosed in braces:
```c
struct key {
  char *word;
  int count;
} keytab[] = {
  "auto": 0,
  "break": 0,
  ...
}
```
It would be more precise to enclose initializers for each "row" or structure in breaces, as in:
```c
{ "auto", 0 },
{ "break", 0 },
{ "case", 0 },
...
```

but the inner braeces are not necessary when the initializers are simple varialbes, or character strings, and when all are present, As usual, the number of entries in the array `keytab` will be computed if initializers are present and the `[]` is left empty.


---


C provides a compile-time unary operator called `sizeof` that can be used to compute the size of any object, The expressions:
```c
sizeof object
// And
sizeof(type number)
```
yield an integer equal to the size of the specifed object or type in bytes.
Strictly, `sizeof` produces an unsigned integer value whose type, `size_t`, is defined in the ehader `<stddef.h>`.
An ojbect can be a varialbe, or array or structure, A type name can be the name of a basic type like `int` or `double`, or a derived type like a `structure` or a pointer.

you can uses it something like this too:
```c
#define NKEYS (sizeof keytab / sizeof(struct key))
```
Another way to write this is to divide the array size by the size of a specific element:
```c
#define NKEYS (sizeof keytab / sizeof keytab[0])
```
This has the advantage that it does not need to be changed if the type changes.

A `sizeof` can not be used in a `#if` line, because the preprocessor does not parse type names.
But the expression in the `#define` is not evaluted by the preprocessor, so the code herer is legal.

Some of the standard hedear `<ctype.h>` functions:
- `isalpha` is to identify letters
- `isalnum` is to identify letters and digits
