## Pointers to Structures
- You can't add two pointer together.

if an structure is like:
```c
struct {
  char c;
  int i;
};
```
char one byte and int four bytes, it might well require eight bytes, not five, The `sizeof` operator returns the proper value.

A function can return a structure pointer like:
```c
struct key *binsearch(char *word, struct key *tab, int n)
```


## Self-refrential Structure
For counting all the words:

For more efficent programming, we can use something called `binary-tree`, the tree contains one "node" pre distinct word; each node contains:

- A pointer to the text of word
- A count of the number of occurrences
- A pointer to the left child node
- A pointer to the right child node

No node may have more that two children; it might have only zero or one.

for example:
```c
struct tnode {          /* the tree node: */
  char *word;           /* points to the text */
  int count;            /* number of occurrences */
  struct tnode *left;   /* left child */
  struct tnode *right;  /* right child */
};
```

It is illegal for a structure to contain an instance of itself, but:
```c
struct tnode *left;
```
declares `left` to be a pointer to a `tnode`, not a `tnode` itself.

self-refrential strucutres: two structure that refer to each other, The way to handle this is:
```c
struct t {
  ...
  struct s *p;   /* p point to an s */
};

struct s {
  ...
  struct t *q;   /* q points to a t */
}
```

> (P-155), explain
> About malloc and free, the function talloc wich returns a pointer to a free space suitable for holding a tree node

If the tree becomes "unbalanced" because the words don't arrive in random order, the running time of the program can grow too mutch.

In C, the proper method is to declare that `malloc` returns a pointer to void, then explicitly coerce the pointer into desired type with a cast.
`malloc` and related routines are declared in the standard header `<stdio.h>`.

and `talloc` can be written as (P-155):
```c
struct tnode *talloc(void){
  return (struct tnode *) malloc(sizeof(struct tnode));
}
```
NOTES:
`malloc` returns **NULL** if no space is availabe.
Storage obtained by calling `malloc` can be freed for re-use by calling `free` see [Chapter 7]() and [Chapter 8]()



## Table Lookup
When a line like:
```c
#define IN 1
```

when the name `IN` appears in a statement like:
```c
state = IN;
```
it must be replaced by `1`.

There are two routines that manipulate the name and replacement texts.
`install(s, t)` records the name `s` and the replacement text `t` in a table, and returns a pointer to the place where it was found, or **NULL** if it wasn't there.

The algorithm is a hash search the incoming name is converted into a small non-negative integer. which when used to index into an array of pointers.
An array element points to the beggining of a linked list of blocks descibing names, that have that hash value. It is **NULL** if no names have haded to that value.


A block in the list is a strucutre containingg pointers to the name, the replacement text, and the next block in the list, A null next-pointer marks the end of the list

```c
struct nlist {         /* talbe entry */
  struct nlist *next;  /* next entry in chain */
  char *name;          /* defined name */
  char *defn;          /* replacement text */
}
```

the pointer array is just:
```c
#define HASHSIZE 101

static struct nlist *hashtab[HASHSIZE]; /* pointer table */
```

> READ AGAIN.
The hashing functino, which is used by both `lookup` and `install`, adds each character value in the sorting to a scrambled combination of the previous ones and returs the remainder modulo the array size. (P-158 explained ())
