## Typedef
C provides a facility called `typedef` for creating new data type names. For eaxmple, the declaration:
```c
typedef int Lenght;
```

make the name `Lenght` a synonym for `int`, The type `Length` can be used in declarations, casts, etc.., exactly the same ways that the type `int` can be:
```c
Length len, maxlen;
Length *lengths[];
```
Notice that the type being declraded in a `typedef` appears in the position of a varialbe name, not right after word `typedef`.
Syntacically `typedef` is like the storage classes, `extern`, `static` etc...

you can use them for structures too:
```c
typedef struct tnode *Treeprt;
```

NOTE: It must be emphasized that a `typedef` declration does not create a new type in any sence; it merely adds a new name for some existing type. Varialbes declared this way have exactly the same properties as variable whose declarations are spelled out explicitly.

NOTE: `typedef` is like `#define` except that since it is intrepreted by the compiler, it can cope with textual substitutions that are beyond the capabilities of the processeor
for example:
```c
typedef int (*PFI)(char *, char *);
```

cerates the type PFI, for "pointer to function(of two char * arguments) returning int", which can be used in context like:
```c
PFI strcmp, numcmp;
```

There are two main reason for using `typedef`s.
1. The first is to parametersize program against portability problems.
for example: If `typedef`s are used for data types that may be machine-dependent, only the typedefs need change when program is moved.

2. The second purpose of `typedef`s if to provide better documentation for a program.



## Unions
A *union* is a variable that may hold (at different times) objects of different types and sizes, which compiler keeping track of size and alignment requirements.
Unions provide  a way to manipulate different kinds of data in a single area storage.

It is most convinent for table managments if the value occupies the same amount of storage and is stroed in the same place regardless of  its type. This is the purpose of a union, a single variable can legitimately hold any one of several types.
The syntax  is based on structures:
```c
union u_tag{
  int ival;
  float fval;
  char *sval;
} u;
```

The varialbe `u` will be large enough to hold the largest of the three types; the specific size is implementation-dependent.
Any of these types may be assigned to `u` and then used to expressions.
So long as the using is consistent: the type retrieved must be the type most recently stored.

member of unions accessed by:
```c
union_name.memeber
// or
union_pointer->member
```

you can check the type too:
```c
if(utype == INT)
  printf("%d\n", u.ival);
  ...
// can be "FLOAT", "STRING", ...
```

NOTE: Unions may occure within structures and arrays, and vice versa (Accessing the members is like: **Nested** structures thye are kind of simular but for different usage...)

In effect, a union is a strucute in which all members have offset zero from the base.
The structure is big enough to hold the **widest** member, The same operations are premitted on unions as on strucutres.

> [!NOTE]
> A union may only be initialized with a value of the type of its first member.

thus the union `u` described above can only be initialized with an integer value.



## Bit-fields (p-163)
When stroage spaces is at a premium, it may be necessary to pack several objects into a single machine word;

One common use is a set of single-bit flags in applications like compiler symbol tables.


A `bit-field` or `field` for short, is a set of adjacent bits within a single implementation-defined storage unit that we will call a "word".
The syntax of field definition and access is based on structures.

Example fields:
```c
struct {
  unsigned int is_keyword : 1;
  unsigned int is_extern  : 1;
  unsigned int is_static  : 1;
} flags;
```

This defines a variable called `flags` that contains tree 1-bit fields. The number following the colon represents the field width in bits.
The fields are declared `unsigned int` to ensure thatt they are unsigned quantities.

can be accessed like:
```c
flags.is_keyword
flags.is_extern
etc...
```

Almost everything about fields is implementation-dependent.

SOME NOTES:
- Fields need not be named; unnamed fields (a colon and width only) are used for padding.
- The special width 0 may be used to force alignment at the next word boundary.
- Fields are assigned left to right on some matchines and right to left on others.
- when picking apart externally-defined data; programs that depend on such things are not portable.
- Fields may be declared only as *int*s; for portability, specify `signed` or `unsigned` explicity.
- They are not arrays and the do not have address, so the `&` operator cannot be applied to them.
