# Chapter 7
## Input and Output
Input and Output facilities are not part of the C language itself.
programs that confine their system interactions to facilities provided by the standard library can be moved from one system to another without change.


## Standard Input and Output
A text consists of a sequence of lines; each line ends with a newline(`\n`) character, If system donsen't operate that way, the library does whatever it necessary to make it appear as if it dones.

The simplest input mechanism is to read one character at a time from the *standrad input*, with the `getchar` keyword.

```c
int getchar(void)  // Returns a text input  character
```

The `getchar` returns a `EOF` when it encounters end of file. The symbolic constant `EOF` is defined in `<stdio.h>`.

> [!NOTE]
> The test should be written in terms of EOF so as to be independent of the specefic value.

In many envirenments, a file may be substituted for the keyboard by using the `<` convention for input redirections: if a program `prog` uses `getchar` then the command line:
```bash
prog  <infile
```
causes `prog` to read characters from infile instead. The switching of the input is done in such a way that `prog` itself is oblivious to the change; in particular the string `<infile` is not included in the command-line arguemtns in `argv`. Input switching is also invisible if the input comes from another program via a pipe machanism: on some system, the command line:
```bash
otherprog | prog
```
runs two prgram `otherprog` and `prog` and pipes the standard output of `otherprog` inot the standard input for `prog`,

The function:
```c
int putchar(int)
```
is used for output: `putchar(c)` puts the character c on the *standard output*, which is by default the screen. `putchar` returns the character written, or EOF if an error occurs. Again, output can usually be directed to a file with `>filename:` if `prog` uses `putchar`:
```bash
prog > outfile
```

will write the standard output `outfile` instead. if pipes are supported,
```bash
prog | anotherprog
```
puths the standard output of `prog` inot the standard input of `anotherprog`.

Output produced by `printf` also finds its way to the sandard output.
Calls to `putchar` and `printf` may be interleaved-ouputs appears in the order in which the calls where made.

Each soruce file that refers to an input/output library functions must contain the line:
```c
#include <stdio.h>
```

before the first rereference, when the name is brackted by `<` and `>` a search is made for the header in a standard set of places (for eacmple, on UNIX systems, typically in the directory `/usr/include`).

REMINDER: the function `tolower(int)` is defined in `<ctypes>`.

"functions" like `getchar` and `putchar` in `<stdio.h>` and `tolower` in `<ctype.h>` are often macros, thus avoiding the ovearhead of a function call per character.


## Formatted Ouput--Pritf

The output function `printf` translates internal values to characters.
```c
int printf(char *format, arg1, arg2, ...)
```
`printf` converts, formats, and prints its arguments on the standard output under control of the `format`, it returns the number of characters printed.
>> The conversion specifications, eash of wich causes converions

NOTE: Each conversion specification begins with a `%` and end witha conversion character.
Between the `%` and the conversion character there may be, in order:
- A minus sign, which specifies left adjustment of the converted arguments.
- A number that specefies the minimum field width, The converted argument will be printed in a filed at least this wide, If necessary it will be padded on the left (or right; if left adjustment is called for) to make up the filed width.
- A number, the precision, that specifies the macimum number of characets to be printed from a string, of the number of digits after the decimal point of the floating point value, of the minimum number of digits for an integer.
- An `h` if the integer is to be printed as `short`, or `l` (letter ell) if as a long.

> [!NOTE]
> If the character after the % is not a conversoin  speification, the behavior is undefined.

### Table of specifiers
| Character | Argument Type | Printed as |
|-----------|----------------|------------|
| d, i      | int            | decimal number. |
| o         | int            | unsigned octal number (without a leading zero). |
| x, X      | int            | unsigned hexadecimal number (without a leading 0x or 0X), using abcdef or ABCDEF for 10, ..., 15. |
| u         | int            | unsigned decimal number. |
| c         | int            | single character. |
| s         | char *         | print characters from the string until a '\0' or the number of characters given by the precision. |
| f         | double         | [-]m.dddddd, where the number of d's is given by the precision (default 6). |
| e, E      | double         | [-]m.dddddd e± xx or [-]m.dddddd E± xx, where the number of d's is given by the precision (default 6). |
| g, G      | double         | use %e or %E if the exponent is less than -4 or greater than or equal to the precision; otherwise use %f. Trailing zeros and a trailing decimal point are not printed. |
| p         | void *         | pointer (implementation-dependent representation). |
| %         | no argument is converted | print a %. |


A width or precision may be specified as `*`, in which case the value is computed by converting the next arguemtn (which must be an int). for example:
```c
printf("%.*s", max, s);
```

The following table shows the effect of variety of specification in priting "hello, world" (12 characters).
We have put colons around each filed so you can see its extent.

|        Input        |      Output      |
|:--------------------|:-----------------|
|   :%s:              |   :hello, world: |
|   :%10s:            |   :hello, world: |
|   :%.10s:           |   :hello, wor:   |
|   :%-10s:           |   :hello, world: |
|   :%.15s:           |   :hello, world: |
|   :%-15s:           |:hello, world   : |
|   :%.15.10s:        |:     hello, wor: |
|   :%-15.10s:        |:hello, wor     : |


> [!WARNING]
> printf uses its first argument to decide how many arguemtns follow and what their types are.
```c
printf(s);       /* FAILS if s contains % */
printf("%s", s); /* SAFE */
```

The function `sprintf` does the same conversions as `printf` does, but stores the output in a string:
```c
int sprintf(char *string, char *format, arg1, arg2, ...)
```
`sprintf` formats the arguments in `arg1`, `arg2`, etc... according to  `format` as before, but places the result in `string` instead of on the standard output; `string` must be big enough to receive the restul.


## Variables-length Argument Lists
The proper declaration `printf` is:
```c
int printf(char *fmt, ...)
```
where the declaration `...` means that the number and type of these arguments may vary. The declaration `...` can only appear at the end of an argument list.
The standard header `<stdarg.h>` contains a set of macro definitions that define how to step through an argument list.
The implementation of this header will vary from machine to machine, bu the interface it presents is uniform.

The type `va_list` is used to declare a variable that will refer to each argument it turn. The macro `va_start` initialized variable of type `va_list` to point to the first unnamed argument, It must be called once before the variable is used.

NOTE: There must be at least one named arguemnt; the final named arguemnt is used by `va_start` to ge started.

Each call of `va_arg` returns one argument and steps the variable to the next; `var_arg` uses a type name to determine what type to return and how big a step to take.
`va_end` does whatever cleanup is necessary. It  must be called before the function returns.



## Formatted Input--Scanf
The function
```c
int scanf(char *format, ...)
```

`scanf` reads characters from the standrad input and store the results throught the remaining arguemnts. The other argument must be a pointer.

`scanf` stops when it exhusts its fromat string. or when some input fails match the control specification. It returns as its value the number of successfully matched and assigned input items. This can be used to decide how manu fully items were found. On end of file, `EOF` returned.
Note that this is different from 0, which means that the next input characters does not match the first specification in the format string.
The next call to `scanf` resums seaching immediately after last character already converted.

There is also a function `sscanf` that read from a string instead of the standrad input:
```c
int sscanf(char *string, char *format, arg1, arg2, ...)
```
It scans the `string` according to the format in `format`, and store the restulting values through `arg1`, `arg2`, etc..., and all of the args must be pointers.
The format string usually contains specifications which are used to control conversion of input,

The foramt string may contains:
- Blank or tabs which are ignored.
- Ordinary characters (not %) which are expected to match the next non-white space characters of the input stream.
- Conversion specifications, consisting of hte character %, an optional assignemnt suppression *, and optional numbers specifing a maximum field widht an optional `h`, `l`, or `L` indicating the widthof the target, and a convesion character.

A conversion specification directrs the conversion of the next input field.

The conversion characers indicated the interpreation of the input field, The corresponding arguemt must be a pointer, as requied by the call-by-value semantics of C.

```KRC_BOOK
p 172
```
[**SEE THE TABLE**](#table-of-specifiers)

and `g` may be preceded by `l` to indicate that a pointer to `double` rahter than `float` is in the arguemts list.

Suppose we want to read input lines that contains dates of the from
```text
25 Dec 1988
```
The `scanf` statment is:
```c
int day, year;
char monthname[20];

scanf("%d %s %d", &day, monthname, &year);
```
No `&` is used with monthname since an array name is a pointer.

> [!WARNING]
> The arguemnt to scanf and sscanf must be pointers.

```c
scanf("%d", n);   // ERROR
scanf("%d", &n);  // CORRECT
```
This error is not generally detected at compile time.
