## File Access
One program that illustrates the need ofr such operations is `cat`. which concatenates a set of named files onto the standard output.
`cat` only prints files in screen.

Before tit can be read or written, a file has to be *opend* by the library function `fopen`.

`fopen` takes an external name like `x.c` or `y.c` does same housekeeping and negotiation with the operationg system, and returns a pointer to be used in subsequent reads or writes of the file.

This pointer, called for `file pointer`, points to a strucutre that contains information about the file, such as location of a buffer, the current character position in the buffer, whether the file is being read or wirttne, and wheater errors or end of file have occurred.
and strucutre decloration that called `FILE` is from `<stdio.h>`
for example:
```c
FILE *fp;
FILE *fopen(char *name, char *mode);
```
This is says that `fp` is a pointer to a `FILE` and `fopen` returns a pointer to a `FILE`(The `FILE` is the type name, not a structure tag, it is defined with `typedef`.)

The call to `fopen` is a porgram is
```c
fp = fopen(name, mode);
```
- `name` -> `character string`: containing the name of the file (path)
- `mode` -> `character string`: indicates how one intends to use the file.

|   Mode   |   Action   |
|:---------|:-----------|
|    `r`   |    read    |
|    `w`   |    write   |
|    `a`   |    append  |

Some systems distinguish between text and binary files; for the letter, a `b` must be appended to the mode string.

> [!NOTE]
> If file does not exists for writing or appending, it is created if possible,


> [!WARNING]
> unlike opening and appending; writing causes the old content of file be discarded.

NOTE 1: trying to read a file that does not exsits is an **ERROR**, or something like: trying to read a file when you don't have permission etc...
NOTE 2: ** If there is any error, fopen will return _NULL_ **

### For writing or reading files (ACTION):
- `getc` returns the next character from a file; it needs the file pointer to tell it which file, and `EOF` when it is at the "end of the file" or any error.
```c
int getc(FILE *fp);
```
- `putc` writes the character c to the file `fp` and returns the character written, or `EOF` if an error occurs.\
```c
int putc(int c, FILE *fp)
```

NOTE: `putc` and `getc` just like `putchar` and `getchar` may be a macros instead of functions.

---

When a C program is stared, the oprating system environment is resposible for opening three files and providing file pointers for them, these three files are:
- The standard input
- The standrad output
- The standrad error

the corresponding files file pointers are called:
- `stdin`
- `stdout`
- `stderr`

and all of the are declared in `<stdio.h>`.

Normally `stdin` is connected to the keyboard, `stdout` and `stderr` are connected to the screen. but `stdin` and `stdout` may be connected to the pipes (no the default wich is scrren).

`getchar` and `putchar` can be defined in terms of `getc`, `putc`, `stdin` and `stdout` as follows:
```c
#define getchar()   getc(stdin)
#define putchar(c)  putc((c), stdout)
```

for formatted input or output files, the functions `fscanf` and `fprintf` may be used.
These are identical to `scaf` and `printf`, except that the first arguemnt is a file pointer that specifies the file to be read or written; the format string is the second argument:
```c
int fscaf(FILE *fp, char *format, ...)
int fprintf(FILE *fp,  char *format, ...)
```

NOTES:
- The file pointers `stdin` and `stdout` are objects of type `FILE *`, they are constant, however, **not varable** so it is possible to assing to them.

The function:
```c
int fclose(FILE *fp)
```
is the inverse of `fopen`; it breaks the connection between the file pointer and the external name that was established by `fopen`, freeing the file opointer for another file.

- Some OS have limited access for each porgram to have access in some files simultaneously.
- Another reasong for `fclose` on an ouput file--it oflushes the buffer in which `pubc` is collecting output. `fclose` is called automatically for each open file `putc` is collecting output, `fclose` is called automatically for each open file when a program terminates normally.

- You can alose close `stdin` and `stdout` if they are not needed. They can also be reassigned by the library function `freopen`.



## Error handling--Stderr and Exit
Output written on `stderr` normally appears on the screen even if the standrad output is redirected.

there are 2 ways for this:
```c
fprintf(stderr, "%s: error wriging stdout\n", prog);
```
diagnostic output produced by `fprintf` goes onto `stderr`, so it finds its way to the screen instead of disappearing down a pipeline or into an output file.


Second, the program uses the standard library function `exit`, which terminates program execution when it is called. The argument  of `exit` is available to whatever process called this one, so the success or filure of the program can be tested by another program that uses this one as a sub-process.
Conventionally, a return value of `0` signals that all is well; `non-zero` values usually signal abnormal situation.

Within `main` return _expr_ is equivalent to `exit(expr)`, `exit` has the advantage that it can be called from other functions, and that call to it can be found with a patter-searching program.

The function `ferror` returns non-zero if an error occurred on the stream `fp`.
```c
int ferror(FILE *fp)
```

Although output errors are rare, they do occur, for example if a disk fills up..., so a production program should check this as well.

The function `feof(FILE *)` is analogus to `ferror`; it returns non-zero if end of the file has occurred on the specified file.
```c
int feof(FILE *fp)
```

> Any serious program should take care to return sensible, sueful status value.



## Line Input and Output
The standard library provides an input routine `fgets` that is similar to the `getline` function that we have used in earlier chapters:
```c
char *fgets(char *line, int maxline, FILE *fp)
```
`fgets` reads the next input line (including the newline) from file `fp` into the character array `line`; at most `maxline` 1 characters will be read, The resulting line is terminated with `'\0'`.
Normally `fgets` return `line`; on the end of file or error it returns `NULL` (*0 means end of the file*).

For output, the function `fputs` wirtes a string (which need no contains a newline) to a file:
```c
int fputs(char *line, FILE *fp)
```
It returns `EOF` if an error occurs, and zero otherwise.

NOTE: The library functions `gets` and `puts` are similar to `fgets` and `fputs` but operate on `stdin` and `stdout`.
`gets` detect the terminal `'\n'`, and `puts` adds it.


The standard specifies that `ferror` returns non-zero for error; `fputs` returns `EOF` for error and a non-negative value otherwise.



## Miscellaneous Functions
Some of the standard library most usful functions

### String Operations
string functions `strlen`, `strcpy`, `strcat`, and `strcmp` found in `<string.h>`, In the following, `s` and `t` are `char *`'s, and `c` and `n` are `ints`.


- `strcat(s, t)`: concatenate `t` to end of `s`
- `strncat(s, t)`: concatenate `n` character of `t` to end of `s`
- `strncat(s, t, n)`: concatenate `n` characters of `t` to end of `s` return negative, zero, or positive for: `s < t`, `s == t`, `s > t`.
- `strncmp(s, t, n)`: same as `strcmp` but only in first n characters
- `strcpy(s, t)`: copy `t` to `s`
- `strncpy(s, t, n)`: copy at most `n` characters of `t` to `s`
- `strlen(s)`: return length of `s`
- `strchar(s, c)`: return pointer to first `c` in `s`, or `NULL` if not present
- `strrchr(s, c)`: return pointer to last `c` in `s`, or `NULL` if not present


### Character Class Testing and Conversion
Severla functions from `<ctype.h>` preform dcharacter test and conversions.
In the following, `c` is `int` that can be represented as an `unsigned char`, or `EOF`, The functions return `int`.

- `isalpha(c)`: non-zero if `c` is alphabetic, 0 if not
- `isupper(c)`: non-zero if `c` is upper case, 0 if not
- `islower(c)`: non-zero if `c` is lower case, 0 if not
- `isdigit(c)`: non-zero if `c` is digit, 0 if not
- `isalnum(c)`: nonzero if `isalpha(c)` or `isdigit(c)`, 0 if not
- `isspace(c)`: non-zero if `c` is blank, tab, newline, return, formfeed, vertical tab
- `toupper(c)`: return `c` conveted to upper case
- `tolower(c)`: return `c` conveted to lower case

### Ungetc
```c
int ungetc(int c, FILE *fp)
```
pushes the character `c` back onto file `fp`, and returns either `c`, or `EOF`, for an error. Only one character of pushback is guaranteed per file. `ungetc` may be used with any of input functinos like `scanf`, `getc`, or `getchar`.


### Command Execution
The function `system(char *s)` exeutes the command ontained in the characetr string `s`, then resumes execution of the current program. The content of `s` depend strongly on the local operation system. As trivial example on UNIX systems, the statement
```c
system("date");
```
causes the program `date` to be run; it prints the date and time of day on the standard output. `system` returns system-dependent integer status from the command executed. In the UNIX system, the status retun is the value retuned by `exit`.



## Storage Management
The function `malloc` and `calloc` obtain blocks of memory dynamically.
```c
void *malloc(size_t n)
```
return a pointer to `n` bytes of uninitialized storage, or `NULL` if the request can no be satisfied.

```c
void *calloc(size_t n, size_t size)
```
returns a pointer to enough space for any array of `n` objects of the specified size, or `NULL` if the request annot be satisfied. The storage is initialized to zero.
The pointer returned by `malloc` or `calloc` has the proper alignmentfor the object in question, but it must be cast into the appropriate type, as in:
```c
int *ip;
ip = (int *) calloc(n, sizeof(int));
```

`free(p)` frees the space pointed to by `p`, where `p` was originally obtained by a call to `malloc` or `calloc`. There are no restrictions on the order in wich spaces is freed, but it is a ghastly error to free something not botained by calling `calloc` or `malloc`.

and also you can't use someting after it has been freed.
```c
for(p = head; p != NULL; p = p->next)   /* Wrong */
  free(p);
```
The right way is to save whatever is needed before freeing:
```c
for (p = head; p != NULL; p = q){
  q = p->next;
  free(p);
}
```


## Mathmatical Functions
more 20+ functions declraed in `<math.h>`;
Each takes one or wo `double` arguments and retuns a `double`.

- `sin(x)`: sine of `x`, `x` in radians
- `cos(x)`: cosine of `x`, `x` in radians
- `atan2(y, x)`: arctangent of `y/x`, in radians
- `exp(x)`: exponential function `e^x`
- `log(x)`: natural (base e) logarighm of `x` (`x` > 0)
- `log10(x)`: common (base 10) logarighm of `x` (`x` > 0)
- `pow(x, y)`: `x^y`
- `sqrt(x)`: square root of `x` (`x` >= 0)
- `fabs(x)`: absolute value of `x`


### Random Number Generation
The function `rand()` computes a sequence of pseudo-random integer in range zero to `RAND_MAX`, which is defined in `<stdlib.h>`, One way to produce random floating-poin number greater than or equal to zero but less than one is:
```c
#dfine frand() ((double) rand() / (RAND_MAX+1.0))
```
if library has one itself is better than this one.

The function `srand(unsinged)` sets the seed for `rand`.
