# Chapter 8
## The Unix System Interface
The UNIX OS provides it servies through a set of *system calls*

## File Descriptors
All the I/O is done by reading or writing files. even keyboard and screen are files in the file system.

For example if you want to read or write a file you must inform the system of your indent to do so, a process called *opening* the file.
It check that the file is exists, or even do you have premision and if all is well you can do it.

returns to the program a small non-negative integer called a *file descriptor*, Wwhenver input or output is to be done on the file, the file descriptor is used insteafo of the name to indentify the file.

> A file descriptor is analogous to the file pointer used by the standard library, or to the file handle of MS-DOS.

The user program refers to the file only be the file descriptor.

When the command interpreter (the "shell") runs a program, three file are open, with file descriptors 0, 1 and 2, called the standard input, standard output, standard error, If a program reads 0 and writes 1 and 2, it can do input and output without worrying about opening files.

The user of a program can redirecct I/O to and from files with < and >:
```bash
prog < infile > outfile
```
In this case, the shell changes the default assignments for file descriptors 0 and 1 to the named files.
Normally file descriptor 2 remains attached to the scrren, so error messages can go there.

In all cases, the file assignments are changed by the shell, not by the program. The program does not know where its input comes from nor where its output goes, so long as it uses file 0 for input and 1 and 2 for output.



## Low Level I/O -- Read and Write
Input and output uses the `read` and `write` system calls, which are accessed from C programs through two functinos called `read` and `write`
For both, the first argument is a file descriptor, The second arguemtn is a character array in your program where the data is to go to or come from. The third arguemtn is the number of bytes to be transferred.

```c
int n_read = read(int fd, char *buf, int n);
int n_written = write(int fd, char *buf, int n);
```
Each call returns a count of the number of bytes transformed.
On reading, the number of bytes returned may be less than the number requested.
A return value of zero bytes implies end of file, and -1 indicated an error of some sort.

For writing, the return value is the number of bytes written; an error has occured if this isn't equal to the number requested.

Any number of bytes can be read or written in one call. The most common values are 1, which means one character at a time ("unbuffered"), and a number like 1024, or 4096 that corresponds to a physical block size on a peripheral device.

Large sizes will be more efficient beacuse fwer system calls will be made.

Input and output can be redirected to any file or device.

```c
#include <unistd.h>  // "syscalls.h"
// https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7380591/what-happened-to-syscalls-h
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void){
  char buf[BUFSIZ];
  int n;

  while((n = read(0, buf, BUFSIZ)) > 0)
    write(1, buf, n);
  return 0;
}
```

VERY IMPORTANT NOTE:
IN THE BOOK FOR SYSCALLS USES `#include "syscalls.h"` WHICH IS WRONG AND SHOULD BE: `#include <unistd.h>` INSTEAD.


The paramter `BUFSIZ`: its value is a good size for the local system. If the file size is not a multiple of BUFSIZ, some `read` will return a smaller number of bytes to be written by `write`; the next call to `read` after that will return zero.

NOTE: `read` and `write` can be used to construct higher-levl routines like `getchar` and `putchar` etc...

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd>

int my_getchar(void){
  char c;
  return (read(0, &c, 1) == 1) ? (unsigned char) c : EOF;
}
```

`c` must be a `char`, because `read` needs a cahracter pointer. Casting `c` to `unsiged char` in the return statement eliminates any problem of sign extension.


if wrote some `stdio` functions for example `getchar` remeber to use `#undef` to `getchar` and use your version


## Open, Creat, Close, Unlink
you must explicitly open files in order to read or write them. There are two system calls for this.
`open` and `creat[sic]`.

`open` is rather like the `fopen`, except that instead of returning a file pointer, it returns a file descriptor, which isi just a `int`, `open` returns `-1` if any errro occurs.

```c
#include <fcntl.h>

int fd;
int open(char *name, int flags, int perms);

fd = open(name, falgs, perms);
```

As with `fopen` the name arguemts is a character string containing the filename (address), The second arguemtn, `flags`, is an `int` that specifies how the file is to be opened; the main values are:
- `O_RDONLY` open for reading only
- `O_WRONLY` open for writing only
- `O_RDWR` open for both reading and writing

These constants are defined in `<fcntl.h>` on System V UNIX systems, and in `<sys/file.h>` on ZBerkely (BSD) versions.

To open an existing file for reading:
```c
fd = open(name, O_RDONLY, 0);
```
The perms argument is always zero for the uses of `open` that we will discuss.

It is an error to try to `open` a file that does not exist. The system call `creat` is provided to create new files, or to re-write onld ones.
```c
int creat(char *name, int perms);
fd = creat(name, perms);
```
returns a file descriptor if it was able to create the file, and -1 if not, If the files already exists, `creat` will truncate it to zero length, thereby discrading its previous contents; it is not an error to `creat` a file that already exists.

If the file does not already exist, `creat` creartes it with the premissions specified by the `perms` argument. In the UNIX file system, there are nine bits of premission informatino associated with a file that control `read`, `write` and execute access for the owner of the file, for the owner's group, and for all others.
Thus a three-digit octal number is convenient for specifying the permissions.

For example, 0755 specifies read, write and execute permission for the owner, and read and execute permission for the group and everyone else.

Function `error` is called with variable argument lists much like `printf`. The implementation of `error` illustrates how to use another member of the `printf` family.
The standrad library function `vprintf` is like `printf` except that the variable arguemtn list is replaced by a single argument that has been initialied by calling the `va_start` marco.
Similarly, `vfprintf` and `vsprintf` much `fprintf` and `sprintf`.


There is a limit (ofther about 20) on the number of files that a program may have open simultaneously. Accordingly, any prgram that intends to process many files must be prepared to re-use file descriptors.
The function `close(int fd)` breaks breaks the connection between a file descriptor and an open file, and frees the file descriptor for use with some other file; it corresponds to `fclose` in standard library except that there is no buffer to flush. Termination of a program via `exit` or return from the main program closes all open files.

The function `unlink(char *name)` removes the file name from the file system. It corresponds to the standard library function `remove`.



## Random Access -- Lseek
The system call `lseek` provides a way to move around in a file without reading or writing any data:
```c
long lseek(int fd, long offset, int origin);
```
sets the current position in the file whose descriptor is `fd` to `offset`, which is sets the current position in the file whose descriptor is `fd` to `offset`, which is taken relative to the location specified by `origin`. Subsequent reading or wriging will begin at that position.
`origin` can be `0`, `1`, or `2` to specify that `offset` is to be measured from the begginging, from the current position, or from the end of the file respectively.
For example to append to a file (the redirection >> in the UNIX shell, or "a" for `fopen`), seek to the end before writing:
```c
lseek(fd, 0L, 2);
```
To get back to the beggining ("rewind")
```c
lseek(fd, 0L, 0);
```

Notice that `0L` argument; it could also be written as (`long`) `0` or just as `0` if `lseek` is properly declared.

With `lseek`, it is possible to treat files more or less like large arrays, at the price of slower access.

The return value from `lseek` is a `long` that gives the new position in the file, or `-1` if an error occurs.
The standard library function `fseek` is similar to `lseek` except that the first argument is a `FILE *` and the return is non-zero  if an error occurred.


## Example -- An Implementation of Fopen and Getc
Recall that files in the standrad library are described by file pointers rather than file descripts.
A file pointer is a pointer to a structure that contains severla pices of information about the file: a pointer to a buffer, so the file can be read in large chunks; a count of the number of characetrs left in the buffer; a pointer to the next character position in the buffer; the file descriptor; and flags describing read/write mode, error status, etc...

The data structure that describes a file is contained in `<stdio.h>` which must be inluced (by `#include`) in any source file that uses routines from the standrad input/outout library.
It is also included by functions in that library.
In the following excepts from a typical `<stdio.h>` names that are intended for use only by function of the library begin with an underscore so they are less likely to collide with names in user's programs.
The conversion is used by all standard library routines.

NOTE: long `#define` is continued with a backslash

The function `_fillbuf` to replenish the buffer, re-initialize the strucutre contents ,and return a character. The caracters are returnd `unsinged` which ensures that all characetres will be positive.

The function `fopen` can now be written, Most of `fopen` is concerned with getting the file opened and positioned at the right place, and setting the flag bits to indicate the proper state, `fopen` does not allocated any buffer space; this is done by `_fillbuf` when the file is first read.

NOTE: The "+" in `fopen` permits both reading and writing.

The first  call to `getc` for a particular file finds a count of zero, which forces a call of `_fillbuf`.
If `_fillbuf` finds that the file is not open for reading, it returns `EOF` immediately. Otherwise, it tries to allocate a buffer (if reading is to be buffered).

Once the buffer is stablished, `_fillbuf` calls `read` to fill it, sets the count quent calls to `_fillbuf` wil find a buffer allocated.

flags in 0, 1, 2 for stdio.h:
```c
FILE _iob[OPEN_MAX] = {  /* stdin, stdout, stderr */
{ 0, (char *) 0, (char *) 0, _READ, 0 },
{ 0, (char *) 0, (char *) 0, _WRITE 1 }
{ 0, (char *) 0, (char *) 0, _WRITE | _UNBUF, 2}
}
```
The initialazation of the `flags` part of the strucutre shows that `stdin` is to read, `stdout` is to be written, and `stderr` is to be written unbuffered.
