## Example -- Listing Directories
Sometimes we need informatins about a file not what it contains.

Since a UNIX directory is just a file, `ls` need only read it to retrieve the filenames, But it is necessary to use a system call to access ohter information about a file, such as its size.

review of UNIX file system strucutre:
A directory is a file that contains a list of filenames and some indication of where they are located.
The "location" is an index into another table called the "inode list".
The *inode* for a file is where all information about a file except its name is kept.
A directory entry generally consists of only two items, the filename and an inode number.

directory are not the same on all version of the system.
The outer level defines a structure called a `Dirent` and three routines `opendir`, `readdir`, and `closedir` to provide system-independent access to the name and inode number in a directory entry.

The `Dirent` structure contains the inode number and the name.
The maxiumu lengh of a filename component is `NAME_MAX`, which is a system dependent value.
`opendir` return a pointer to a structure called `DIR`, analogus to `FILE`, which is used by `readdir` and `closedir`,
The information is collected into a file called `dirent.h`

The system call `stat` takes a filename and returns all of the information in the inode for that file, or -1 if there is an error.
```c
int stat(char*, struct stat*);
```

The strucutre describing the value returned by `stat` is in `<sys/stat.h>`, and typically looks like this:
```c
struct stat{  /* inode information returned by stat */
    dev_t st_dev;    /* device of inode */
    ino_t st_ino;    /* inode number */
    short st_mode;   /* mode bits */
    short st_nlink;  /* number of links to file */
    short st_uid;    /* owner's user id */
    short st_gid;    /* owner's group id */
    dev_t st_rdev;   /* for special files */
    off_t st_size;   /* file size in characters */
    time_t st_atime; /* time last accessed */
    time_t st_mtime; /* time last modified */
    time_t st_ctime; /* time inode last changed */
}
```

The type like `dev_t` and `ino_t` are defined in `<sys/types.h>`, which must be included too.

The `st_mode` entry contains a set of flags describing the file, The flag definitions are also included in `<sys/stat.h>`

flag names `S_IPMT` and `S_IFDIR` from `<sys/stat.h>` are used to decide if the file is a directory. Parenthesization matters, because the precedence of `&` is lower than that of `==`.

each directroy always contains entries for itself called `.` and its parent `..`.

usually the `Direct` structure is like this:
```c
#ifndef DIRSIZ
#define DIRSIZE 14
#endif
struct direct  /* directroy entry */
{
  ino_t d_ino;    /* inode number */
  d_name[DIRSIZ]; /* long name does not have '\0'*/
}
```

The type `ino_t` is a `typedef` that describes the index inot the inode list.
It happens to be `unsinged short` on the system we use regularly

A complete set of "system" types is found in `<sys/types.h>`.

`opendir` opens the directroy, verifies that the file is a directroy (this time by the system call `fstat`, which is like `stat` except that it applies to a file descriptor).

`closedir` closes the directroy file and frees the space

`readdir` uses `read` to read each directroy entry. If a directory slot is not currently in use (becase a file has been removed), the inode number is zero, and this position is skipped.
Otherwise, the inode number and name are placed in a `static` strucutre and a pointer to that is returned to the user.
Each call overwrites the information from the previous one.

Many programs are not "system programs"; the merely use information that is maintained by the oprating system.



## Example -- A Storage Allocaator
`malloc` calles upon the operating system to obtain more memory as necessary.
Rather that allocating from a compiled-in fixed-sized array, `malloc` will request space from the operating system as needed.

The space that `malloc` manages may not be contiguous.
Thus its free storage is kept as a list of free blocks. Each block contains a size. a pointer to the next block, and the space itself.
The blocks are kept in order of increasing storage address, and the last block (highest address) points to the first.

If the most restrictive type can be stored at a paricular address, all other types may be also.
On some matchines, the most restrictive type is a `double`; on others, `int` or `long` suffices.

A free block contains a pointer to the next block in the chain, a record of the size of the blocks, and them the free space itself; the control information at the beginning is called the "header".
all blocks are multiples of the header size, and the header is aligned properly, This is achives by a union that contains the desired header strucutre and an instance of the most restrictive alignemnt type, which we have arbitary made a long

In `malloc` the requested size in characters is rounded up to the proper number of header sized unites; the block that will be allocated contains one more unit, for the header itsefl, and this is the value recorded in the `size` field of the header.
The pointer returned by `malloc` points at the free space, not at the header itself, The user can do anything with the space requested, but if anything is writted outside of the allocaed space the list is likely to be scrambled.

The size filed is necessary because the blocks controlled by `malloc` need no be contiguous--it is not posiible to compute sizes by pointer arithmetic.

The varialbe `base` used to get started. If `freep` is NULL, as it is at the first call of `malloc` then a degenerate free list is created; it contains one block of size zero, and points to itself.
In any case, the free list is then seached. The search for a free block of adequante size begins at the point (`freep`) where the last block was found;

If a too-big block is found, then tail end is returned to the user; in this way the header of the original needs only to have its size adjusted. In all cases, the pointer retruned to the user points to the free spaced within the block, which begins one unit beyond the header.

---


The function `morecore` ontains storage from the operating system. The details of how it does  this vary from system to system.

Since asking the system for memory is comparatively epensive operation, we don't want to do that on every call to `mallco`, so `morecore` requests at least `NALLOC` units; this larger block will be chopped up as needed, After setting the size field, `morecore` inserts the additional memory into the arena by calling `free`


The UNIX system call `sbrk(n)` retunrs a pointer to n more bytes of storage. `sbrk` returns -1 if there was no space, even though `NULL` would have been a better design.
The -1 must be cast to `char *` so it can be compared with teh return value. Again, casts make the function relatively immune to the details of pointer representation on different machines.

Ther e is still one assumption, however that pointers to different blocks returned by `sbrk` can be meaningfully compared.
This is not guranteed by the standrad, chis permits pointer comparisons only within an array. Thus this version of `malloc` is protable only among machines for which general pointer comparsion is meaningful.


`free` itself is a the last thing, It scans the free list, starting at `freep` looking for the palce to insert the free block, This is eigher between two existing blocks  or at one end of the list, In any case, if the block begin freed is adjacent to either neighbor, the adjacent blocks are combined. The only trobules are keeping the pointers pointing to the right htings and the sizes correct.

> Storage allocation is intrinsically machine-dependent.
